Covid-19 has affected the global economy and changed the business landscape, and many businesses, big and small, are struggling to survive. Is there a place for supplier development in these dark times? This question was debated by specialists Litha Kutta, Tiger Brands enterprise and supplier development director; Guy Harris, enterprise and supplier development specialist, and Vikesh Singh, SAB supplier development manager, during the Absa Business Day Supplier Development Dialogue series hosted on June 10 2020, in partnership with Fetola, Cold Press Media, and Arena Holdings. Panellists agreed that while times were challenging, supplier development presents an opportunity for strengthening ecosystems that will deliver long-term benefits to corporates and small suppliers. Watch the full dialogue below Seven vital, low-cost solutions were identified to bolster efficiency, foster innovation and build stronger supplier ecosystems in companies during these challenging times: “There is no doubt that enterprise and supplier development will play an even more critical role in driving economic revival in the aftermath of the Covid-19 crisis. Innovation and digitisation will be central to building stronger, smarter supply chains and ensuring a lasting economic recovery,” said Vusi Fele, chief procurement officer at Absa. “At Absa, we believe that opening up opportunities for SMEs to access corporate supply and delivery chains is one for the most efficient and consistent ways in which established corporates can contribute to sustainable entrepreneurship development. This will be even more crucial in the post-Covid-19 economic recovery environment. Both corporates and SMEs need to think about doing business differently to thrive in the new normal.” “Now is the time to be ultra effective in business and aim to do more for less. Supplier development in 2020 is about efficiencies built through communication and collaboration,” said moderator Catherine Wijnberg, CEO of Fetola. “This is not the time to ‘go it alone’ and save ourselves at the cost of our small suppliers, but the time to take big, bold decisions, to look inward at our own country, look outward as part of Africa, and accelerate our path to recovery.”