The 2020 Financial Mail Top Analyst Awards will move online on July 28 2020. The awards, in association with IRESS, the JSE and the CFA Society SA, recognise SA’s top analysts in the institutional stockbroking industry. The Financial Mail has been associated with the Top Analyst survey since 1975 — the only survey in SA that provides a reliable and independent ranking of skills in the industry. The research, conducted by Intellidex, is estimated to cover 90% of the institutional market through confidential questionnaires completed by domestic institutional clients of SA stockbroker firms. Forty-eight awards will be announced across various investment sectors in 2020. In addition to IRESS and JSE, this year we are proud to be partnering with the CFA Society South Africa, which has been involved in the awards for five years under the auspices of the Young Analyst Award. Once again, our judges found it an absolute pleasure reviewing the young analyst report submissions for 2020. These judges are volunteers of the CFA Society South Africa, sponsors of the top analysts awards and initiator of the young analyst categories. The quality of the reports are remarkable, indicating strong depth of industry and company specific research. There was a broad spectrum of coverage, across industrials, resources, financials, quants and thematic; with judges citing well-articulated investment cases that linked well to the valuations. A stand out feature of the winning report is a unique take on relative valuation. Young analysts that scored highly went into a lot of detail on the various drivers and catalysts of both the industries and the companies. Top analysts also spent time reflecting on qualitative aspects with a comprehensive risk assessment of the company and valuation risks. Date: Tuesday July 28 2020Time: 11am - 12pm >> Click here to register and get a reminder In 2019, Standard Bank SBG Securities was named as the overall top firm. RMB Morgan Stanley was awarded as the top firm – execution: equities dealing 2019, and Rand Merchant Bank was named the top firm – execution: fixed interest securities 2019. A special report on the 2020 research findings will be published in the Financial Mail magazine on Thursday July 30 2020.