Months before the economy was finally opened two weeks ago, scientists were advising the government on the harm of the lockdown, the collateral health damage and how irrational regulations could backfire. The ministerial advisory committee (MAC), a group of world-class scientists, has given the government advice on how to manage the Covid-19 epidemic on various topics, including how many people can safely ride in a taxi, when to open schools and treatment options. Thanks to requests from news outlet News24, the MAC’s recommendations are now public. Despite the scientists desire for the documents to be public, Health Minister Zweli Mkhize refused to release them. He has admitted, however, that the government did not always follow the MAC’s advice, as it considers views from other lobbyists. But News24 sent the government a Promotion of Access to Information (Paia) request, giving it 60 days in total to release the advisories — which it didn’t do. But earlier this month, News24 then filed an appeal. On Thursday, when Mkhize’s health department released the documents, it argued rather defensively that it had taken almost all of the advice. “There are few advisories (less than 5%) that were not implemented by the department in their entirety” said the department’s press release. But a quick read of some the 45 advisories reveals that the government, at best, was painstakingly slow at listening to its experts, even as the economy collapsed. The result: an estimated 3-million job losses, widespread hunger and huge tax shortfalls. The government’s lethargy in taking the doctors’ advice on the lockdown restrictions looks even worse, considering so little of the promised R500bn economic stimulus package has been delivered. For example, a key part of the stimulus is a R200bn loan guarantee scheme. But even though it was designed to help an estimated 700,000 businesses, only 10,000 companies had been granted these loans by the beginning of August. At the same time, the Temporary Employment Relief Scheme (Ters), which is meant to make up any shortfall in salaries due to Covid-19, has been suspended due to fears of fraud. When it comes to the science, the advisories reveal: These excerpts from the advisories show that while Mkhize is right that the government did listen to the advice often, it didn’t do so speedily, even as the economic damage mounted.