Every morning, I roll over in bed, grab my phone, check my horror show of an inbox, read a couple of morning mailers like this one, and then open the New York Times app. I do their Spelling Bee, and then read about all kinds of things I didn’t know I wanted to read but am glad I have. Like this piece on why 100 years ago, black American singer Mamie Smith’s song Crazy Blues shook things up. Or about how Thailand’s students are taking on the military, borrowing from Harry Potter. Sometimes I even wade into their mostly critical commentary of Trump. Whether or not you agree with their political stance, you’d be hard-pressed to find a news brand that’s more impressive — never mind a print product that’s migrated to online with such success. The digital subscribers are the proof. There are now more than 6-million of them. As with many media brands, their advertising revenue fell off a cliff when Covid-19 arrived, but those millions of paying customers sure helped to mitigate the fallout. Interestingly, whilst the mass of us fans get our fix online for $0.47 per week, the New York Times still make the majority of its cash from print subscribers. All 840,000 of them. Read this piece from Harvard’s media-focused Nieman Lab for the deep dive into the current state of the NYT. Print or digital, they are the proof that we’ll pay for quality and a simple, good experience. I have definitely drunk the New York Times Kool-aid. But, I also subscribe to a lot of other news outlets, and so here, is my very small precis of what else is on offer, worth paying for. Lest me not forget, if you haven’t already, you’ll also want to subscribe to the Financial Mail itself (R200/month for a print copy at home, plus full access to BusinessLIVE, or less for just a print copy). For those who’ve migrated to the digital product, download our FM app, from which you can download the full magazine, exactly as it appears in print. And lastly, I do realise this roundup is primarily an Anglo/American take on global news so, if anyone has any great suggestions of other top class providers of the stuff, from elsewhere, that I should be reading, please let me know, along with your take on what it gives you. *Buitendach is the FM's Life editor and editor of Wanted magazine. This is a roundup of the best Covid-19 news from the web, brought to you in today’s FM lockdown newsletter. To subscribe, for free, click here.