A round up of wine-related news to lift your spirits. Farm to table It’s unlikely that you’ll be getting together with mates for a wine tasting in the Cape anytime soon, but you can certainly pretend that you’re all polishing off a couple of excellent bottles of red in the picturesque Constantia Valley. More to the point, you can make like you’re at Steenberg Farm enjoying a wine tasting. If only! The clever folk at the much-loved wine estate have developed three tasting boxes of their goods for home delivery. Each one comes with tasting notes and QR codes that link to videos of cellar master Elunda Basson guiding you through the virtual tasting. There are three options. The Classic Tasting Selection is ideal for newbie wine enthusiasts and offers a good introduction to the farm’s goods. This sample — or flight, as it’s called in the world of wine — comprises a méthode cap classique (MCC), sauvignon blanc, rosé and three red wines (including a stellar blend and syrah). Diehard MCC fans will obviously go for the Bubbly Tasting Selection. This offering starts with a sparkling sauvignon blanc and goes on to Steenberg’s renowned range of fizz, including the flagship prestige cuvée, Lady R. In the mood for a real spoil? Order the Flagship Tasting Selection. This showcases the diversity of the farm’s vineyards. The nebbiolo, semillon, intense Catharina red blend, pinot noir MCC and Black Swan sauvignon blanc are some of the signature wines representing the best of Steenberg in this flight. steenbergfarm.com Our quick picks to buy now: Tokara cabernet sauvignon 2017 This gem won gold at the 2020 Gilbert & Gaillard International Challenge and boasts dried cranberry, red currant and subtle cassis aromas with hints of dried herbs and tobacco spice. Expect a mouthful of sweet berries, spice and light toasted notes. R125 a bottle, tokara.com Constantia Glen FIVE 2016 The 2016 vintage of this cracking treat — the estate’s flagship wine — is out. Its predecessor was named best blended red wine at the 2019 International Wine & Spirit Competition, and this latest iteration of blended Bordeaux red grape varieties — cabernet sauvignon, cabernet franc, merlot, petit verdot and malbec — is sure to be a hit too. R465 a bottle, constantiaglen.com Are the Publik wine bars in Cape Town and Joburg our favourite in the land? You betcha. Do we long to be squeezing onto their bench seating with friends to enjoy some burrata and a glass of whatever Cape Town barman Dominic Bodenstein recommends? Yes a thousand times. In a bid to channel these lovely spots, and because they produce some of the finest graphic design work of any local brand, we’re buying copies of the amazing posters they’ve used to promote their wines, their themed food evenings and their warehouse sales. For real cool cred, frame a couple and hang them in your kitchen or wine cellar. publik.co.za