Last week, Paul Ash compared Bulelani Qholani — who illegally invaded land in Khayelitsha and is now reported to have been selling plots of this public land to vulnerable residents — to the iconic image of "the unknown man who … stood in front of a column of People’s Liberation Army tanks in a seething Tiananmen Square in Beijing in June 1989". The fact that Ash sees fit to so casually put these two images in the same league is shameful. Many in today’s media seem so desperate to virtue-signal at the first sign of outrage that few seem to pause and properly investigate what they’re writing about. The land that was illegally invaded in Khayelitsha is protected by a court order; it is part of a R162m water infrastructure project aimed at connecting thousands of Khayelitsha residents to high-pressure water. The pipeline is being built, and near daily anti-land-invasion operations are necessary to keep it on track. To date there have been no evictions at the site, only anti-land-invasion operations. We know this because of our ongoing monitoring [of the site]. It might be uncomfortable to acknowledge, but the incident was orchestrated by a number of local NGOs that released only a short video clip to create a distorted view of events. We were able to see what really happened because of footage taken by law enforcement officers, who now film anti-land-invasion operations as a result of the false accusations levelled against them. Qholani is initially seen fully clothed outside — not taking a bath. In further footage he emerges from one of the structures naked, unprompted and without any law enforcement near him. He paces up and down, fully exposing himself to onlookers and waving an ID card, before law enforcement removes him. Notwithstanding the provocation, we don’t condone the aggressive handling of the matter by some of the officers. Four of them were immediately suspended, pending the outcome of an investigation into their conduct. This is apparently not worth mentioning by Ash, who seems more interested in legitimising the breaking of the law. It is disturbing that the rule of law seems to be an afterthought for so many these days. But one might accept that in a country like SA, where national politicians do as they please without any consequence, we shouldn’t be surprised when the average man on the street thinks he can do the same. Unfortunately, there are many thousands of silent victims bearing the brunt of land invasions, whether because of land lost for housing or services, the pollution of waterways due to uncontrolled development, or deserving beneficiaries who are queue-jumped by land invaders. Ash is right when he says: "In the end, something will have to give." If those in the media who love to trumpet the outrage don’t start refocusing on the facts, it won’t be long before the public’s trust in the media will be gone altogether. Dan PlatoExecutive mayor of Cape Town The FM welcomes concise letters from readers. They can be sent to fmmail@fm.co.za