Whether you’re prepared to put down R10m-plus on a Pierneef or you’re after investing in an upcoming artist for a bargain, here are two local online art endeavours to take note of. Strauss & Co live virtual auction Auction house Strauss & Co’s winter live virtual auction will be held over three days, from July 25 to 27. "The virtual sale, a partnership with Invaluable.com, the world’s leading international platform for buying art, antiques and collectibles online, will replicate a physical saleroom scenario, with Strauss & Co’s auctioneers conducting the sale live, in isolation," says Strauss & Co chair Frank Kilbourn. This is the one to watch if an SA masterpiece is on your wish list. There’s a monumental bushveld scene by Pierneef as the cover lot, and works by Gregoire Boonzaier, Dylan Lewis, Alexis Preller, Gerard Sekoto, Irma Stern and Edoardo Villa available. If your plans to invest your millions in art have been scuppered by Covid-19 (whose haven’t?) but you’d still like to indulge your passion, Strauss & Co will continue hosting its well-received programme of daily Zoom virtual talkabouts, which feature company specialists and guest speakers in conversation about highlights of the July sale. straussart.co.za Latitudes Online Latitudes aims to make viewing and purchasing African art more accessible every day. "Our aim is to change the way art is bought and sold. We believe it’s time for a revolution, for an all-year-round platform that brings together galleries, not-for-profit organisations, curators and independent artists to sell their art side by side," says Latitudes co-director Lucy MacGarry. The online platform will build on the success of the Latitudes physical fair held in September last year, with visitors to Latitudes Online also able to enjoy a wealth of experimental, filmic, video and digital work on the platform. "By promoting such work alongside traditional painting and sculpture, we aim to change perceptions around its value," says MacGarry. latitudesartfair.com