Logitech Pebble M350, Logitech’s wired and wireless peripherals appeal because of their wide range and ability to use a single unifying receiver for multiple products. This Logitech mouse pairs via Bluetooth or a USB receiver, and set-up is within seconds. The mouse has a minimalist modern design that is silent when you click and scroll — the company claims it is 90% more silent than most pads. The Pebble M350 is portable, though this may not be its most-needed accessory in a lockdown. But if you’re in a household where parents and children alike need to be on laptops for work and school, it is useful for its silent feature. The mouse has a flat upward slant form, which does take getting used to especially if, like me, you’ve been using an ergonomic mouse. I used it for several hours throughout the day but wanted to go back to my previous one for anything longer. The Pebble M350 is best suited to an environment where you’ll need to work for just a few hours — like at a coffee shop — or when it’s possible to travel again. R450 from Takealot Logitech MX Keys Plus Along with the Pebble mouse, I paired the new MX Keys Plus keyboard to both my Windows PC and MacBook simultaneously, and used one unifying adapter for the mouse and keyboard on the PC. The keyboard supports up to three paired devices, but I had to consult the manual to link it to a second device. It required me to hold the Easy-Switch button down for three seconds to get into pairing mode again. It works seamlessly when you toggle between paired devices. This keyboard falls under the Master range that has features for creatives and coders, with support like customisable shortcuts for Photoshop or the ability to scroll through 1,000 lines of code per second. And it comes with a cushioned palm rest which is great for all-day use. The keyboard is responsive, and when typing fast you don’t necessarily hear every keystroke. It was comfortable to type on and has keys that support Windows and Mac. It’s an overall winning combination if you want few distractions. The illuminated keyboard automatically adapts to lighting conditions or can be controlled manually, but it always told me my home office was too bright to turn it on. This is one of the most comfortable keyboards I’ve used. So, what’s the catch? At R2,155 — including the palm rest — it does not come cheap. Available at laptopdirect.co.za Snug mousepad with wireless charger The Logitech mouse and keyboard can be paired with the Snug mousepad, which has a built-in wireless charger for supported smartphones. It is a widish rectangle mousepad that houses a mouse and phone side by side. The wireless charger has a 5W 1A charging voltage with a charging distance of 3mm-10mm. It is important to note that the wireless charging functionality is not as powerful as your standard cable charger; the tech isn’t there yet. Nevertheless, great for working from home. R459 at macnificent.co.za