The University of Cape Town’s Graduate School of Business (GSB) is the only SA business school to make it in to the top 100 of the 2020 executive MBA ranking of the London Financial Times (FT). The ranking, published this week, places the GSB 56th in the world. Unlike the standard MBA, which is considered traditionally as a stepping stone towards senior management, the executive MBA is intended for those already there but who want to develop their expertise and leadership skills further. Kosheek Sewchurran, director of the GSB executive programme, says the course is designed to attract executives who are “serious about character development and want to shift their intelligence, as well as their orientation, to find new ways of leading”. The 2020 FT ranking highlights the growing collaboration between established Western business schools and up-and-coming institutions in developing countries. The top-ranked school is a joint venture between US-based Kellogg School of Management and the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Second is the China Europe International Business School (Ceibs), which has campuses in Switzerland, China and Ghana. Third is HEC Paris, with campuses in France, China and Qatar. And fourth is Trium, a network consisting of HEC Paris, the London School of Economics and New York University’s Stern Business School. Another French School, Insead, shares fifth place with a Chinese partner, Tsinghua University. The collaboration has campuses in China, France, Singapore and the United Arab Emirates. Schools are ranked on criteria such as graduates’ career and salary progress since their graduation and the gender diversity, faculty qualifications, research and corporate social responsibility of the institutions. GSB director Catherine Duggan describes those on the FT ranking table as an “elite group of truly global business schools”. She says: “It is vital for business leaders to be able to navigate an increasingly complex world, especially in Africa and emerging markets. GSB students graduate with a powerful set of tools for leading through uncertainty and change.”