More than 75% of South Africans pass away without a valid will in place, causing devastating consequences for their families and dependants. To help combat this statistic, the Law Society of SA (LSSA) promotes National Wills Week, every year, and participating attorneys offer their drafting services for basic wills at no cost to clients. Wills Week is normally in September, but due to Covid-19 and lockdown, the LSSA has announced that National Wills Week will be from October 26 to 30 this year. Why have a National Wills Week? Most people know they need a will, but statistics show that South Africans are notorious procrastinators. In a recent survey we conducted, we asked people why they haven’t got their wills in order. The results? So, with more than 75% of South Africans passing away without a will in place, it’s not necessarily an awareness issue – it’s an education issue. People need to know the devastating consequences their families and dependants will face if they were to pass away without a will. In our business, we see the reality of families struggling to deal with the loss of a loved one almost every day. This struggle is more difficult when the parent’s affairs are not in order. Having a National Wills Week is important – but it’s not enough. For us, every week is Wills Week; we’re actually making it Wills Month. When we see how we are helping families in their darkest hour, we are motivated to continue our quest to change the stats of a nation. The top five consequences of passing away without a will Capital Legacy has dedicated the past eight years to helping more South Africans get valid wills in place. We have helped more than 300,000 people so far and are committed to changing the statistics of our country. We want to help more people understand why it’s important to finalise their will, and make it easy and convenient for them … so there’s no excuse not to get this important task done. Five ways we make it easy for you to get your will sorted Our mission is to help more South Africans get valid wills in place and change the statistics we see in the market. Please don’t procrastinate – get your will sorted today. For more info and to book your free will consultation, visit: www.capitallegacy.co.za. This article was paid for by Capital Legacy.