In 1990, the SA economy was the largest in Africa by a long stretch — four times larger than Nigeria (at $31bn) and three times larger than Egypt ($43bn). By 2015, SA’s GDP in dollar terms was the smallest of the three. Nigeria was at about $500bn, Egypt at $332bn and SA at $315bn. During this time the exchange rate collapsed from R2.59/$ to R11.50. The slide in the value of the rand applied continuous pressure on the purchasing power of South Africans, pushing more than half the population into poverty. Nigeria and Egypt are hardly countries whose economic performances warrant being emulated. Though both have large and enterprising populations, they have been racked by political turmoil and face Islamist insurgencies. Yet they have surpassed SA. The destruction of wealth and infrastructure is a blight on the ANC. The party’s policy of cadre deployment in the civil service and at state-owned enterprises (SOEs) has led inexorably to a degrading of these institutions. Without exception, our once well-functioning and viable SOEs have been rendered penurious, requiring handouts to survive. The ongoing attempts by Pravin Gordhan and others in the ANC to resuscitate and revive SAA speak volumes of their misguided minds and policies. Surely, they are aware that the R10.4bn that the state has offered to pay will not suffice to keep the airline afloat until January 2021. With interest on debt representing the single largest expense in our fiscal budget, the continued financing of vanity projects such as SAA is harebrained and irresponsible. President Cyril Ramaphosa is once more on the streets with his begging bowl, asking the International Monetary Fund and those that have lent money to African states to write off about $200bn in loans. Ironically, SA will soon be knocking on the doors of these very lenders to ask for a bailout. Don’t be surprised when finance minister Tito Mboweni resigns and our exchange rate takes another plunge, making all the citizens of this beautiful country even poorer. Ben LevitasOranjezicht, Cape Town The FM welcomes concise letters from readers. They can be sent to fmmail@fm.co.za