According to Sir Adam Thomson, the founder of the British Caledonian airline, "a recession is when you have to tighten your belt; a depression is when you have no belt to tighten. When you’ve lost your trousers — you’re in the airline business." These words, uttered back in 1984, remain relevant today. The airline business is one that has had more than its fair share of bankruptcies, bailouts and buyouts over the years. The market is unpredictable, the competition cut-throat and the cost structures ridiculously burdensome. Despite this it seems the industry is here to stay, in one form or another, and will be with us far into the future. The question is: in what form will commercial air travel continue in a post-Covid world? The answer, unfortunately, is that none of us can truly say. Locally, SAA is on the ropes, but FlySafair recently took delivery of new 737s. As a privately owned domestic carrier, all FlySafair is doing is stepping into the market where SAA used to play. SA Airlink, I am led to believe, is not doing too badly either. And hopefully Comair will take to the skies again soon. Having said that, the lockdown must have had a disastrous effect on these companies’ balance sheets, and I take my hat off to their staff and directors for coming out of those perilous months able to fly again. All of this will come at a cost — either through less choice on the part of the consumer, or because of collectively higher fares and the frustration of mandatory health checks and quarantine periods. A determined passenger who is willing to pay the price will still be able to travel from point A to point B. But the airlines themselves will continue to suffer. As US investor Warren Buffett said in his 2008 annual letter to Berkshire Hathaway shareholders: "The worst sort of business is one that grows rapidly, requires significant capital to engender the growth, and then earns little or no money. Think airlines. Here a durable competitive advantage has proven elusive ever since the days of the Wright brothers. Indeed, if a farsighted capitalist had been present at Kitty Hawk, he would have done his successors a huge favour by shooting Orville down." Adrian FaccioLinksfield, Joburg The FM welcomes concise letters from readers. They can be sent to fmmail@fm.co.za